# Summary

The size of the pupil is controlled by two muscles that are located in the iris: the iris sphincter muscle, which is innervated by the parasympathetic nervous system and causes the pupil to constrict; and the iris dilator muscle, which is innervated by the sympathetic nervous system and causes the pupil to dilate [e.g. @Kardon2005;@McdougalGamlin2008].

There are three distinct kinds of pupil responses. The pupil light response is a constriction of the pupil in response to increased brightness. The light response is partly reflexive, but is modulated by many factors related high-level cognition: visual awareness, covert visual attention, eye-movement preparation, and subjective brightness [e.g. @Binda2014Trends;@Math2015CurrDir].

The pupil near response is a constriction of the pupil that occurs when gaze shifts from a far-away to a nearby object; the near response is generally accompanied vergence eye movements and lens accommodation, and these three eye movements are together called the near triad [@MaysGamlin1995]. The near response is, at least in part, a reflex. Whether the near response, like the light response, can be modulated by high-level cognition is still unclear [@Enright1987VisRes;[@Van+der+mijn2017]].

The function of pupil constriction in response to light and near-fixation is presumably to increase visual acuity and depth of field by decreasing how much of the eye's lens is exposed; in addition, pupil dilation in darkness may reduce the time required for dark adaptation by reducing (but not eliminating) the difference in retinal illumination when going from a bright into a dark environment [@WoodhouseCampbell1975].

The psychosensory pupil response is a dilation of the pupil in response to increased arousal, mental effort—or more generally, anything that 'activates the mind' [@BeattyLucero2000]. The same response is sometimes also referred to as reflex dilation, arousal-related dilation, or effort-related dilation. The psychosensory response can take the form of a fast-but-transient pupil dilation as part of an orienting response [@WangMunoz2015Curr]. It can also take the form of a slower, but more prolonged dilation that reflects more sustained increases in arousal or mental effort. The adaptive-gain theory is an influential theory that has linked pupil size to modes of behavior [@AstonCohen2005]: a small pupil would reflect drowsiness; an intermediate-size pupil would reflect *exploitation*, a state in which attention is narrowly focused on a single task; and a large pupil would reflect *exploration*, a distractible mode that is characterized by switching between tasks. In other words, according to the adaptive-gain theory, the psychosensory sensory pupil response reflects a shift from exploitation to exploration. The link between pupil size and behavior mode is supported by several studies [e.g. @Gilzenrat2010;@JepmaNieuwenhuis2011]; however, the question of *why* the pupil dilates during exploration relative to exploitation has received little interest. One possibility is that large pupils increase visual sensitivity (how well you can detect faint stimuli) at the expense of visual acuity (how well you can distinguish fine detail), and that increased visual sensitivity is especially beneficial during exploration, or more generally, during situations in which arousal is high.

In conclusion, pupil responses are an important class of eye movements. Like other kinds of eye movements, such as saccades and smooth pursuit, pupil responses have properties of reflexes as well as voluntary action. Although there is still much to learn about the function of pupil responses, they are clearly an important part of active vision.
