# Pupillometry: Physiology, Function, and Psychology

Seeing is an activity. We do not passively let visual information fall onto our retina, but rather actively seek out objects of interest by moving our body, head, and eyes. The saccadic and smooth-pursuit eye movements that control gaze have been studies extensively [e.g. @Kowler2011]. But eye movements do far more than direct gaze: once gaze has been directed at an object of interest, our eyes continue to move to provide our brain with the best possible image: the curvature of the lens changes (*accomodates*) to control focus; and our pupils enlarge (*dilate*) or shrink (*constrict*) to control how much of the lens's surface is exposed, and consequently how much light enters the eye. In this review, I will focus on this last type of eye movement: pupil responses.

The pupil changes its size in response to three distinct kinds of stimuli: it constricts in response to brightness (the *pupil light response*, or PLR) and near fixation (the *pupil near response*, or PNR); and it dilates in response to increased cognitive activity, such as increased levels of arousal or mental effort (the *psychosensory pupil response*, or PPR).

Pupil responses are partly reflexive, in the sense that the same stimulus always leads to a qualitatively similar response: pupils always constrict, and never dilate, in response to light. But pupil responses are also partly voluntary, in the sense that they are modulated by higher-level cognition: when you choose to attend to a light in peripheral vision, your pupils will constrict more than when you choose to ignore this light [e.g. @BindaMurray2015]. This is similar to other eye movements, such as saccades and smooth pursuit, which also have properties of reflexive as well as voluntary action [e.g. @Zoest2017]. One aim of this review is to discuss how the different kinds of pupil responses are modulated by higher-level cognition.

Current understanding of pupil responses is largely descriptive; that is, we know what kind of stimuli trigger pupil responses, and we know, more or less, which neural pathways underly these responses. But we do not fully understand *why* the pupil responds in the way it does and to the things it does. This is different from other eye movements, for which the function is generally clearer: we make saccadic and smooth pursuit eye movements to stabilize the retinal image, and to bring relevant objects into foveal vision [@Land1999Why;@Walls1962]. But why does your pupil dilate when your get aroused? Another important aim of this review, reflected also in the title, is therefore to consider the function of pupil responses: how do pupil responses help us to better see the world?
