# Spontaneous fluctuations in pupil size

Even when there is no direct external stimulation, the size of the pupil tends to spontaneously change. Such spontaneous pupil-size fluctuations are sometimes called *hippus* or *pupillary unrest*. *Hippus* is generally used to describe periodic fluctuations, whereas *pupillary unrest* is a more general term that refers to any kind of spontaneous fluctuation.

What, if anything, do spontaneous pupil-size fluctuations reflect? @Lowenstein1963 observed that when participants were awake and alert, their pupils were relatively large and stable; in contrast, as participants grew tired, their pupils became progressively smaller and more restless, dilating and constricting in cycles of several seconds to a minute. @Lowenstein1963 speculated that these fluctuations reflected the waxing and waning of arousal that participants experienced as they grew tired. In line with this, @BoumaBaghuis1971 observed that pupillary unrest was most likely to occur when participants were left to themselves without a specific task, presumably because this induced drowsiness; when participants were given a task, such as mental calculation, spontaneous pupil-size fluctuations mostly disappeared.

More recently, we showed that spontaneous pupil-size fluctuations correlate with changes in eye-movement behavior [@Mathôt2015Large]+[; see also @Marzouki2017]. More specifically, we found that people are more likely to look at conspicuous parts of images or videos when their pupils are small, compared to when their pupils are large. In line with @Lowenstein1963, we interpreted this in terms of arousal, or how much effort people invest their behavior: when pupils are small, indicating low arousal, behavior tends to be guided by the environment, and people therefore tend to look at things that are visually conspicuous [e.g. bright lights, sharp corners, etc; see e.g. @Theeuwes1998PsychSci]. In contrast, when pupils are large, indicating high arousal, behavior tends to be guided endogenously (by the task), and people therefore tend to look at things that are task-relevant but not necessarily visually conspicuous (e.g. things that look like keys if you're looking for your keys). This finding supports the notion that spontaneous pupil-size fluctuations track fluctuations in levels of arousal, and further suggest that these fluctuations affect our behavior in subtle ways.

Reimer and colleagues [-@Reimer2014Pupil;-@Reimer2016Pupil]+[; see also @Joshi2016] investigated the changes in neural activity that accompany spontaneous pupil-size fluctuations. They directly measured brain activity, using a variety of techniques, as well as pupil size in awake, non-moving mice. First, they observed that mice also exhibit pupillary unrest, albeit in slightly faster cycles than humans. Furthermore, they observed that during constriction, visual brain areas became less responsive [@Reimer2014Pupil], suggesting that the mice were less attentive to their environment. They also observed that spontaneous pupil-size fluctuations were correlated with activity in noradrenergic projections to the cortex [@Reimer2016Pupil], suggesting that the locus coroeleus (LC), an important source of noradrenergic input to the cortex [@AstonCohen2005], may be driving pupil-size fluctuations. However, activity in several other brain areas also correlates with pupil size, and this makes it difficult to pinpoint one specific brain area as the main driver of pupil-size fluctuations [@Joshi2016].

Taken together, spontaneous fluctuations in pupil size, often called pupillary unrest or hippus, seem to reflect fluctuations in level of arousal, and are especially pronounced when someone is tired [@Lowenstein1963] and not engaged in a specific task [@BoumaBaghuis1971]. Like the psychosensory pupil response, spontaneous pupil-size fluctuations are linked to activity in the LC [@Reimer2016Pupil;@Joshi2016].
