# The psychosensory pupil response


## Profile


> "Man may either blush or turn pale when emotionally agitated, but his pupils always dilate." [@Loewenfeld1958, p. 237]


The pupil dilates after an arousing stimulus, thought, or emotion. Here I call this the *psychosensory pupil response* (PPR), because this term aptly indicates that this response is driven by both sensory and psychological stimuli. But the same response is sometimes also referred to as *reflex dilation*, *arousal-related dilation*, or *effort-related dilation*. The profile of the PPR varies depending on how it is elicited, but the example data, again from myself, in %FigSound shows a typical PPR elicited by a sound (a brief burst of auditory noise). %FigMemory shows a typical PPR during a working-memory task [cf. @KahnemanBeatty1966].


%--
figure:
  id: FigSound
  source: sound.svg
  caption: The profile of a typical psychosensory response to sound. This figure shows data of myself while hearing a 1 s burst of auditory white noise. Because the effect is small, this figure is based on more data than the previous figures (N=25 trials). The x axis indicates time since stimulus onset. The y axis indicates pupil size as a proportion of pre-stimulus pupil size, and is intentionally kept identical to the other figures to illustrate the size of the effect. Errors bars reflect the standard error. All data shown in this figure and others is available through the URL provided at the end of the article.
--%

%--
figure:
  id: FigMemory
  source: memory.svg
  caption: The profile of a typical psychosensory response during working-memory maintenance. This figure shows data of myself while I listen to 3, 5, or 7 digits (N=25 trials for each set size) played back through a set of desktop speakers, followed by a 5 s retention interval during which I'm keeping the digits in working memory for later recall (recall phase not shown). The x axis indicates time since the onset of the retention interval. The y axis indicates pupil size as a proportion of pre-stimulus pupil size, and is intentionally kept identical to the other figures to illustrate the size of the effect. Errors bars reflect the standard error. All data shown in this figure and others is available through the URL provided at the end of the article.
--%


## Types of psychosensory pupil responses

After decades of intensive study on the PPR, Loewenfeld's quote from 1958 is still a fair summary of the state of the art: Anything that somehow activates the mind, ++or anything that increases the mind's 'processing load' [@Beatty1982]++, also causes the pupil to dilate [reviewed in @BeattyLucero2000;@Goldwater1972;@Einhäuser2017;@Laeng2012Preconscious]. ++Attempts to link specific cognitive processes to the PPR (not mediated by processing load) are therefore, in my view, doomed to fail.++ However, a useful distinction can be made between an orienting response, which is a brief pupil dilation that is elicited rapidly and involuntarily after something has captured attention (as in %FigSound), and slower arousal- or mental-effort-related responses, which are linked to high-level cognition (as in %FigMemory).


### Orienting response

Sudden events (sounds, movements, painful touch, etc.) trigger an orienting response [@Lynn1966;@Sokolov1963]: Your head turns and your eyes move toward the source of the event; your muscles tense, you start to sweat, your heart slows down, and your pupils dilate; more generally, your body prepares for whatever may happen next. The orienting response is most pronounced for stimuli that are unexpected [@Friedman1973] and salient [@WangMunoz2014Euro;@WangBoehnke2014]; in other words, the orienting response is sensitive to signals, such as novelty and saliency, that indicate whether or not something may be important.

The slight pupil dilation shown in %FigSound is (part of) an orienting response. It is small compared to the large changes in pupil size induced by the pupil light response (PLR) and the pupil near response (PNR)—or at least it is when triggered by the relatively mild stimuli that are generally used in psychological studies. In humans, the pupil orienting response is characterized by a fast pupil dilation that peaks between 0.5 and 1 s after stimulus onset and dissipates quickly [see also @Math2014JVis;@WangMunoz2014Euro]. This orienting response is sometimes followed by a second period of dilation, also visible between 1 and 2 s in %FigSound, which is presumably related to arousal, as discussed below.


### Mental effort and arousal

In a series of seminal studies, Hess and Polt [-@HessPolt1960;-@HessPolt1964] and later @KahnemanBeatty1966 showed that pupil size is a reliable indicator of mental effort and arousal. This had already been known for a long time, but these studies from the 60s and 70s brought pupillometry to the attention of psychologists [for historic reviews, see @BeattyLucero2000;@Loewenfeld1958]. This type of PPR is endogenous (i.e. generated by an internal cognitive event) and its size and profile are therefore highly variable, presumably reflecting how mental effort and arousal evolve over time [e.g. @Mathôt2015Large;@Reimer2014Pupil].

In one study, @HessPolt1964 had participants perform mental calculations of different levels of difficulty; for example, 7 × 8 would be easy, whereas 16 × 23 would be difficult. They observed that pupil size reflected the difficulty of the calculation: the harder the calculation, the larger the pupil. This finding was later replicated by @AhernBeatty1979 who additionally observed that people with low scores on scholastic aptitude tests showed stronger pupil dilation in response to complex problems than did people with high test scores; presumably, this reflects that low-scoring people needed to invest more effort.

Along the same lines, @KahnemanBeatty1966 had participants memorize digits, and varied the number of to-be-remembered digits. In line with @HessPolt1960, they observed that pupil size reflected the number of digits that were memorized ++(see also %FigMemory).++ Taken together, these studies, as well as many others that have been conducted since [reviewed in @BeattyLucero2000], showed that pupil size reflects mental effort, cognitive load, or cognitive intensity. Many different terms have been used, but the general finding is clear: whatever activates the mind causes the pupil to dilate.

@HessPolt1960 reported a related finding for arousal. They had participants look at images that varied in how arousing they were, and whom the images were arousing to (based on the authors' subjective impression of the images). The results were clear: when participants viewed arousing images, their pupils dilated, but only when these images were actually arousing to them; for example, men's pupils dilated most to images of naked women, whereas women's pupils dilated most to images of babies and naked men. In a follow-up study, @Hess1965Hetero showed that this effect was even modulated by sexual orientation: gay men's pupils dilated most to images of naked men, whereas straight men's pupils dilated most to images of naked women. These studies show that pupil size reflects arousal. Importantly, whether arousal is triggered by something negative or positive makes little or no difference [e.g. @Bradley2008]; that is, pupil dilation depends on arousal (intense v neutral) rather than valence (positive v negative). Pupil size also correlates with other physiological measures of arousal, such as skin conductance [@Bradley2008]. In terms of pupil size, the effects of arousal and mental effort appear to be similar: both activate the mind, and both cause the pupils to dilate.

Since the seminal studies by Hess and Polt [-@HessPolt1960;-@HessPolt1964;@Hess1965Hetero] and @KahnemanBeatty1966, whose conclusions by and large still hold, there has been little theoretical development in this area—with the notable exception of the adaptive-gain theory discussed below. But pupillometry has since become a standard tool to measure cognitive processing in a wide variety of situations.


## The adaptive-gain theory

The adaptive-gain theory, proposed first by @AstonCohen2005, is an influential theory that deals primarily with the role of the locus coeruleus (LC) in regulating behavior. Because LC activity correlates strongly with pupil size [@Joshi2016], pupillometry has become a popular tool to test predictions of the adaptive-gain theory [e.g. @Gilzenrat2010;@JepmaNieuwenhuis2011]. In my view, this theory has become one of the more interesting frameworks to think about PPRs.

According to @AstonCohen2005, there are two distinct modes of behavior, which they refer to as *exploitation* and *exploration*. Exploitation refers to a behavioral mode in which you are engaged in a single task, such as eating or reading a book; in this mode, you are 'exploiting' the rewards that a task has to offer, such as food or the pleasure of reading. Exploitation is associated with intermediate, phasic (bursty) LC activity, and, consequently, an intermediate pupil size. In contrast, exploration refers to a mode in which you are easily distracted and tend to switch from one task to another; in this mode, you are 'exploring' different tasks, to find the one that offers the highest reward. Exploration is associated with high, tonic (sustained) LC activity, and, consequently, large pupils. (Low LC activity and small pupils are associated with sleepiness.)

According to the adaptive-gain theory, animals alternate exploitation and exploration to optimize reward. The idea is simple: imagine that you are hungry and open a bag of chips. Initially, while you are still hungry, eating the chips offers a high reward, and you therefore continue to 'exploit' this activity. But after some time, you are no longer hungry, and eating chips is no longer rewarding; at this point you switch to exploration, and look for something that offers a higher reward than eating chips. For example, you may start browsing Facebook. It is initially rewarding to see what all your friends have been up to, and you therefore 'exploit' Facebook for a while. But once you've seen all the new posts (and assuming you don't suffer from social-media addiction), reward declines, and you again switch to exploration to find a new, more rewarding activity. And so the exploitation-exploration cycle continues.

The adaptive-gain theory has a high face validity: it makes a lot of sense that animals should alternate between exploration and exploitation; in a way it is not even a theory, but rather a description of behavior that animals clearly exhibit. However, the claim that you can track these switches in behavior mode using pupillometry is new and fascinating. In my view, evidence for this claim is still preliminary, but the results of several studies are certainly suggestive.

In an experiment by @JepmaNieuwenhuis2011, participants performed the Four Armed Bandit task, a variation of the Iowa Gambling Task. In this task, participants freely select a card from one of four possible decks. Each deck is associated with a particular pay-off, and this pay-off changes gradually over time (rather than instantly, as in the Iowa Gambling Task). This task naturally leads to exploitation-exploration cycles in behavior. Once participants discover that a particular deck has a high pay-off, they will keep selecting cards from this deck: exploitation. However, because pay-offs fluctuate gradually, there comes a point at which the once-profitable deck is no longer profitable, and participants consequently start trying other decks: exploration. The crucial finding by @JepmaNieuwenhuis2011 was that pupils were larger during exploration (trying out new decks) than during exploitation (sticking to a profitable deck), as predicted by the adaptive-gain theory. The problem with studies of this kind, however elegant, is that they rely on correlations: behavioral mode (exploitation v exploration) is not manipulated experimentally but inferred from behavior, and switches in behavioral mode are generally correlated with other factors, such as an increase in disappointingly low pay-offs in the study by @JepmaNieuwenhuis2011.

++@JepmaNieuwenhuis2011, and many others, looked at average pupil size over longer periods; that is, they found that exploration is accompanied by a large *tonic* (or *baseline*) pupil size. But another series of experiments showed that exploration is also accompanied by reduced *phasic* pupil responses, that is, a reduced transient pupil dilation in response to stimuli [@Gilzenrat2010]. In other words, during exploration the pupil is large but less responsive, a pattern that mirrors neural activity of the LC [@AstonCohen2005].++

++A fruitful way to think about exploitation and exploration, and their relationship to phasic and tonic pupil responses, is by taking a hierarchical view: all but the most trivial tasks are composed of subtasks that themselves are composed of yet simpler subtasks. Let's trace the task hierarchy of my current situation, from simple to complex: I'm sitting behind my computer, writing this paragraph. Being focused on the task of writing is exploitation, compared to switching to another program, for example to check my email—which would be exploration. But at a higher level, the task of sitting behind my computer at all is exploitation, compared to leaving my desk to get a cup of coffee, which is brewing as I type this—which would be exploration. And at a yet higher level, the task of being at work is exploitation, compared going home—which would be exploration.++

++We can apply this hierarchical view also to experiments, such as the AX-Continuous Performance Task, in which participants are instructed to press a key whenever they see the letter sequence 'AX' [e.g. @ChiewBraver2013]. In this context, exploitation would generally refer to being focused on detecting the AX sequence, whereas exploration would generally refer to being less focused and more prone to distraction. But even when participants are focused on detecting the AX sequence—and are therefore engaged in exploitation at this level of description—they still need to occasionally switch from the micro-task of not pressing a key to the micro-task of pressing a key; in other words, detecting the AX sequence and pressing a key is a form of brief (micro-)exploration, accompanied by a brief (phasic) pupil dilation. In other words, sustained (tonic) and brief (phasic) pupil responses may not be qualitatively different, but rather reflect exploration at different levels and time scales.++

In summary, the adaptive-gain theory provides a refined description of what PPRs may reflect. Its distinction between exploitation (small pupils) and exploration (large pupils) is similar to the traditional distinction between calmness (small pupils), and arousal and effort (large pupils). But it is more specific, and theoretically more interesting.


## Neural basis

The neural pathway of the PPR corresponds to the dilation pathway shown in %FigPathways::b. Fast, orienting-response-like pupil dilation is presumably mediated by activity of the intermediate layers of the superior colliculus (iSC) [@WangMunoz2014Euro;@WangBoehnke2014], and possibly by phasic activation of the locus coeruleus (LC) [@Nieuwenhuis2011]. Slower, arousal- and mental-efforted-related pupil dilation is presumably mediated by, or at least correlated with, activity in the hypothalamus and the LC [@Joshi2016;@AstonCohen2005].


## Function

Researchers have displayed a remarkable lack of interest in the question of why the PPR exists [see Chapter 6 from @Bombeke2017 for an exception]: why do pupils dilate in response to such a wide range of stimuli as sounds, mental effort, and arousal? How does this help us to see the world better, if indeed it does? Consequently, unlike the PLR and PNR, the function of the PPR is mostly unknown. ++Several researchers have even explicitly rejected the idea that the PPR has any function at all, and consider it to be a non-functional side effect of changes in neural activity.++ For example, Beatty and Lucero-Wagoner [-@BeattyLucero2000, p. 142] state that "these exceedingly tiny pupillary movements are too small to be of visual consequence."


In my view, such easy dismissal is unsatisfying. Not only can tiny effects confer an evolutionary benefit [recall the above quote by @Barlow1972], but it is not clear to me that the PPR is necessarily a tiny effect. Of course, in a laboratory, psychologists use weak stimuli, such as the mental calculations and pictures of naked women used by Hess and Polt [@HessPolt1960;@HessPolt1964]. Such stimuli evoke smallish pupillary dilations, although the 20% diameter change observed by @HessPolt1960 is far from negligible. And my own example PPRs shown in %FigSound and %FigMemory are indeed tiny, because I did not feel like subjecting myself to fear of death or extremely loud noise. But an animal that, confronted with a predator, fears for its life surely shows stronger pupil dilation. To my knowledge, how much pupils dilate under extreme conditions is unclear (and perhaps best left unclear for ethical considerations), and it certainly varies strongly from species to species; for example, whereas the surface of the human pupil can change by a factor of about 16, for gekkos it can change by a factor of about 300 [@Denton1956].

So how could PPRs help visual perception? Stefan Van der Stigchel and I recently proposed an explanation [@Math2015CurrDir]. As I described in the sections on the PLR and the PNR, large pupils have both advantages, notably increased visual sensitivity, and disadvantages, notably decreased depth of field and visual acuity. Depending on, among other things, the amount of available light, the advantages outweigh the disadvantages, or the other way around. More specifically, in darkness, you need all the visual sensitivity you can get, and your pupils therefore dilate; but in brightness, visual sensitivity is very high (because light is abundant), and the pupils therefore constrict to increase visual acuity and depth of field.

Presumably, the optimal trade-off between visual sensitivity and visual acuity is not fixed, but depends on the situation. More specifically, if you are calmly focused on a task [exploitation, in the terminology of @AstonCohen2005], visual acuity may be especially important; for example, reading requires fine discrimination, and thus high visual acuity, as do many other tasks. Therefore, in such situations, the optimal trade-off between sensitivity and acuity may shift toward acuity, causing the pupils to constrict. In contrast, if you are aroused and on the look-out for danger and opportunity [exploration, in the terminology of @AstonCohen2005], visual sensitivity may be especially important; for example, a subtle movement somewhere may indicate danger, and it needs to be detected as quickly as possible. Therefore, in such situations, the trade-off may shift toward sensitivity, causing the pupils to dilate. In this view, the PPR would not be a distinct kind of pupil response (as I've depicted it here); rather, it would be yet another way in which more basic pupil responses (i.e. the PLR and PNR) are modulated by high-level cognition.

++Currently, there is little evidence for (or against) a functional role of the PPR as I've outlined above [and see @Math2015CurrDir]. This lack of evidence partly results from the practical difficulties of experimentally manipulating pupil size; that is, to go beyond correlational studies, pupil size needs to be experimentally manipulated, without simultaneously manipulating many other things. This is difficult, but not impossible; for example, artificial pupils can be used [cf. @Woodhouse1975Detection], the pupil can be dilated with eye drops, or pupil size can be manipulated by changing ambient brightness or color (using the fact that red light leads to a more dilated pupil than blue light, cf. %FigLightResponse). All of these approaches have downsides, but in combination they could provide strong support for (or against) a causal link between pupil responses and performance on various perceptual tasks.++

In summary, the function of the PPR may be to find the optimal trade-off between visual sensitivity and acuity for a given situation. In some situations, sensitivity may be more important than acuity, and the pupil may therefore dilate; those situations are generally characterized by high levels of arousal, thus explaining the link between arousal and pupil dilation. In other situations, acuity may be more important than sensitivity, and the pupil may therefore constrict; those situations are generally characterized by calmness.
